# Abstract

- This document covers a list of system topics and practical commands for troubleshooting system issues

# Topics - how they work

## DNS

1. When a user types an human-readable address in his browser, OS's DNS client tries to translate using local cache. If OS failed, it looks for a DNS in LAN. If local area network DNS Server failed, it will forward the query to a DNS cache server provided by ISP (non-authoritative DNS servers). If it failed, then it queries authoritative root name server
2. Authoritative Root name server
   1. Maintains and provides a list of authoritative name servers for each of the top level domains
3. Authoritative TLD server
   1. Maintains and provides a list of authoritative name servers for all domains. Its jobs is to query name servers to find and return the authoritative name server for the requested domain

## Web Servers

1. A program that uses HTTP to serve the files that form Web pages to users, in response to their requests, which are forwarded by their computers' HTTP clients.
2. Attributes
   1. Hardware - stores web server software and a web server software and a website's component files.
   2. Software - Includes several parts that control how web users access hosted files, at minimum an HTTP server. It is a piece of software that understands URLs and HTTP. It delivers content to the end-user's device
3. Types
   1. Static web server - A computer(Hardware) with an HTTP server(Software) that sends its hosted static file "as is" to the browser
   2. Dynamic web server - A static web server plus extra software, which can be application server and database. It's dynamic because the application server updates the hosted files before sending them to your browser via HTTP server
4. Response Code
   1. 1XX - Informational response
      1. 100 - Continue, The server has received the request headers and the client should proceed to send the request body
   2. 2XX - success
      1. 200 - OK, standard successful HTTP response
      2. 201 - Created, the request has been fulfilled, resulting in the creation of a new resource.
      3. 202 - Accepted, the request has been accepted for processing but has not been completed.
      4. 204 - No Content, the server successfully processed the request and is not returning any content.
   3. 3XX - redirection
      1. 300 - Multiple Choices, multiple options for the resource from which the client may choose.
      2. 301 - Moved Permanently, This and all future requests should be directed to the given URI
      3. 302 - Found, previously "Move temporarily" tells client to look at another url.
      4. 304 - Not Modified, indicates that the resource has not been modified since the version specified by the request headers.
      5. 307 - Temporary Redirect
   4. 4XX - client error
      1. 400 - Bad Request, the server cannot process the request due to an apparent client error
      2. 401 - Authorized, similar to 403 forbidden, but specifically for use when authentication is required and has failed or has not yet been provided
      3. 403 - Forbidden, the request was valid, but the server is refusing action. The user might not have the necessary permission for a resource.
      4. 404 - Not Found, the requested resource could not be found.
      5. 405 - Method Not Allowed, The request method is not supported for the requested resource.
   5. 5XX - server error
      1. 500 - Internal Server Error, a generic error message, given when an unexpected condition was encountered and no more specific message is suitable
      2. 501 - Not Implemented, the server either does not recognize the request method, or it lacks the ability to fulfill the request.
      3. 502 - Bad Gateway, the server was acting as a gateway or proxy and received an invalid response from the upstream server.
      4. 503 - Service Unavailable
      5. 504 - Gateway Timeout, the server acting as a gateway or proxy did not receive a timely response from the upstream server.

## Databases

1. Relational Database
   1. Global View
      1. Query Manager
         1. Query executor, optimizer, rewriter, parser
      2. Data Manager
         1. Transaction manager, cache manager, access manager
      3. Tools
         1. Backup manager, recovery manager, monitor manager, administration manager
      4. Core Components
         1. security, fs, client, process, network, memory managers
   2. Query
      1. Execution Steps: Parsed, rewritten, optimized, compiled and lastly executed
      2. Uses B+ Tree for ranges selects
      3. Uses Hash Table join for table joins without sorting
      4. Use Merge join for table joins with sorting
      5. Dynamic Programming to cache computed execution plan
         1. Cache will use LRU algorithm to evict rarely used plans
   3. Transaction Manager
      1. Atomicity - "all or nothing". If the transaction crashes, the state goes back to before transaction - rollback
      2. Isolation - If 2 transactions run at the same time, the result must be the same no matter which finishes first
      3. Durability - Once a transaction is committed, the data stay in the database no matter what happens (crash or error)
      4. Consistency - Only valid data are written to the database, related to atomicity and isolation
   4. How to scale?
      1. Designed for a single server for ACID theory.
      2. Add read replicas and vertical scale write replica scaling.
      3. Add failover or standby support to elect primary for write.
2. NoSQL Database
   1. Many NoSQL databases offer a concept of "eventual consistency" in which database changes are propagated to all nodes "eventually" so queries for data might not return updated data immediately or might result in reading data that is not accurate
   2. Properties for scaling
      1. A key concept in scaling out is "shared nothing".
      2. All data must be evenly distributed or partitioned across these nodes through a process called sharding

## Storage (RAID types)

1. Redundant array of independent disks used for storage management and virtualization technology that allows grouping and management of disk drives.
2. Levels
3. RAID 0 - Drive striping
4. RAID 1 - Drive mirroring
5. RAID 5 - Drive strips across multiple drives and implements a distributed parity across the drives.
6. RAID 6 - Same as RAID 5 but provides double parity
7. RAID 10 - A combination of RAID 1 and 0.
8. Terminology
9. Drive Striping => As data is written, it is split up and distributed among the disks in the set. The good side is a **perf boost** as multiple disks can be written to or read from simultaneously. The bad side is **no redundancy** that a single drive failure can lose all of the data in the entire array.
10. Drive mirroring => Ad data is written, it is written to multiple disks with the same data. The advantage is **data redundancy**. Disadvantage is **reduce usable capacity by half**
11. Distributed parity => If a drive fails, the remaining drives can rebuild the array using the parity information shared between them. It's enough to rebuild any one disk, meaning the array can survive any one disk loss. The parity information **reduces the available space** in the array **by the capacity of one disk**.
12. Distributed Double parity => Any two or less disk losses can be recovered. The capacity of the array is reduced by two disks worth of space

## Security

1. Requirement
   1. Authorization - Only allow those that need access to the data
   2. Authenticity - Verifying they are who they say they are
   3. Integrity - Ensuring that the data has not been tampered with
   4. Non-repudiation - Confirmation that data is received. The ability to prove it in court
   5. Availability - Ensure that the system can perform its required function
2. Physical security
3. Network security
   1. If you keep a computer off the network then the only security risk exists from people able to physically get access the the computer. Once you connect to a network it can potentially become a target for anyone or any computer around the world. When considering the security for a networked computer then we need to consider the security to prevent someone logging onto the computer, but also the security of data that is transmitted over the network.
4. Protecting the network using a firewall to restrict access
5. Protecting wireless networks

## System Failure and recovery

1. If system doesn't boot up at all
   1. If /home is stored in a different partition, then reinstalling Linux is the fastest solution
   2. Load up a USB linux and run on the partition is also viable
2. If the system boots but errors out
   1. LILO/GRUB (Linux Loader)
      1. After BIOS, we can assume most of the hardware is functioning
      2. If you are seeing "LI" and nothing else, run commands to wipe out broken MBR and then reinstall LILO(/sbin/lilo) back into the MBR:
         1. Windows => run "fdisk /mbr"
         2. Linux => "dd if=/dev/zero of=/dev/hda bs=512 count=1"
      3. Most problems ca be fixed by verifying mappings inside /etc/lilo.conf
   2. Loading the kernel
      1. After LILO, kernel image specified in the lilo.conf takes the control.
      2. Messages vary from silence to core dumps if kernel image is corrupted. Fix using a older kernel in /boot. Fix using a copy of your kernel on the distribution cd or inside "/usr/src/linux"
      3. If the problems is with loading hardware, the log is located in /var/log/dmesg. Additional log are boot.log or kern.log
   3. Mounting the disks
      1. If any partition mount point under /etc/fstab is not available, the system will prompt for root password and boot to single user mode (L1). Fix is to comment out the mount line in the /etc/fstab
      2. If a disk was not cleanly unmounted, fsck will check for errors with automatic settings which resolves simple problems but actual errors need to be fixed by running fsck manually in L1. Ex. fsck -b [blocknumber] /dev/[harddrive]
   4. Startup Scripts
      1. Sometimes a startup script can fail. Try find what hardware hardware it depends on. If any messages are displayed. Research scripts with man -k "scriptname". Can be stored in /etc/, /etc/rc.d/ with start up scripts in either rc.boot or rcS.d.
   5. Runlevel Scripts
      1. After initial startup scripts, either runlevel 3 (multiuser shell) or 5 (X window) will be invoked
      2. Check troubleshooting documentation for your specific distribution. Debian start up should be managed using update-rc.d
   6. Providing a Login Prompt
      1. If there is a problem with logging, common problems can be incorrect password, trojan login scripts and rootkits. Fix by validating packages using rpm -V or security program like **tripwire**
3. Recovery Tools
   1. Single User Mode
      1. Allows min system config and "sh" program to be loaded without any profile.
         1. Set from multiuser mode by running "telinit 1".
         2. Set by selecting single user mode option in an image in LILO
   2. Boot Disk
      1. Copy boot.img from CD or run utilities to make a boot disk.
      2. mkbootdisk `uname -r` or mkrboot to create kernel and rootimage bootable from a single floppy.
      3. dd if=[path]/boot.img of=/dev/fd0. Copies boot image to floppy bit by bit
   3. Rescue Disk
      1. Basic file utilities to restore the system
   4. Utilities
      1. gparted and parted offer partition tools and recovery

## How systems boot and load Linux

1. BIOS
   1. Performs some system integrity checks
   2. Searches, loads and executes the boot loader program
   3. Once loaded, it gives the control to boot loader program in MBR or GPT
2. MBR
   1. Typically located in the 1st sector of the bootable disk /dev/hda or /dev/sda
   2. Less than 512 bytes in size
      1. Primary boot loader info 1st 446 bytes
      2. partition table info next 64 bytes
      3. validation checks last 2 bytes
   3. Contains information about GRUB or LILO
3. GRUB
   1. Grand Unified Bootloader, which displays a splash screen, waits for few seconds and if you don't enter anything, it loads the default kernel image as specified in the grub configuration file
   2. It knows the FS in /boot/grub/menu.lst
   3. It loads and executes Kernel and initrd images
4. Kernel
   1. Mounts the root file system specified in the "root=" in grub.conf and executes the /sbin/init program inside that file system and was given PID 1 because it is the first program executed by Linux Kernel
   2. **Initrd** or Initial RAM Disk is used by kernel as temporary root file system until kernel is booted and the real root filesystem is mounted. It **contains necessary drivers** compiled inside which helps it to **access the hard drive partitions and other hardware**
5. Init
   1. Looks at /etc/inittab file to decide the Linux run level
   2. 0 - halt, 1 - single user, 2 - multiuser, 3 - full multiuser, 4 - unused, 5 - X11, 6 - reboot
   3. It will run /etc/rc[1-6].d/[scripts...] up to the run level.

## The shell, and how it interacts with the underlying operating system

1. What is?
   1. A user interface for accessing OS's services. Named shell because it's the outermost layer around the OS kernel.
   2. A CLI interpreter
      1. A terminal is a text input/output environment
      2. A console is a physical terminal
2. Services provided?
   1. file management, process management, batch processing, OS monitoring and configuration
3. How it works
   1. It uses kernel API in just the same way as it is used by other application programs and it manages the user system interaction by prompting users for input, interpreting their input, and then handling an output from the underlying operating system (REPL). Thus, a shell is a replaceable program just like anything else.
   2. It takes inputs from user and calls syscall, which kernel handles it and interacts with hardware device and returns response. It then returns syscall response to user.
4. ioctl commands
   1. Unix CLI interface is built on pseudo terminals (ptys), which is controlled and configured as if it were a hardware device using **ioctl calls**. For instance, the window size of a pty is set using the "TIOCSWINSZ" call.
   2. When applications need to extend the kernel, for instance to accelerate network processing, **ioctl calls provide a convenient way to bridge userspace code to kernel extensions**, which provides a location in the filesystem that can be opened by name, through which an arbitrary numbers of ioctl calls can be dispatched, allowing the extension to be programmed without adding system calls to the OS.
   3. A terminal is a particular kind of device file which implements a number of additional commands (ioctls)
   4. It takes 3 parameters. 1. an open file descriptor, 2. A request code number, 3. an integer value or a pointer to data.
   5. Kernel dispatches ioctl call straight to the device driver which can interpret the request number and data in whatever way required.

## UNIX filesystems and storage

1. Definition
   1. Composed of ordinary files, directories, special files and links
   2. special files -> io devices tty, disk drive, or a printer
2. I-list
   1. The Unix filesystem is mapped in an area of physical memory represented by a single I-list. One I-list points to a speical storage area known as the root fs which contains OS itself and must be available at all times. A temporary directory is created on the root file system as a mount point for removable fs identified by a single I-list. Thus when you cd to that directory of a mounted removable fs, your file operations will be controlled through the I-list of the removable fs.
   2. Each entry inside an I-list is called an i-node which itself is a complex structure that provides necessary flexibility to track the changing fs.
      1. I-node contains information necessary to get info from the storage device typically communicates in fixed-size disk blocks. It contains 10 direct pointers to disk blocks and one/double/triple indirect pointer pointing to a block of direct pointers, a block of indirect pointers, a block of double indirect pointers.
3. How it mounts
   1. Each fs mounted is accessed through its own block special file and that info is kept in a sys database called system table located in /etc/fstab. It includes info about the name of the device, the directory name under which will be mounted, the read and write privileges for the device and possible to mount a fs as "read-only" to prevent users from changing anything.
4. FS Quotas
   1. Limits amount of space, and the number of files that a user can take
5. Paths
   1. /dev => All special device files are kept
   2. /bin => Executable
   3. /etc => Sys configuration files and db
   4. /lib => OS and programming libraries
   5. /lost+found => Fs checker puts detached files
   6. /usr/bin => Additional user commands
   7. /usr/include/ => standard system header files
   8. /usr/lib => user programming and syscall libraries
   9. /usr/local => local utilities
   10. /usr/man => man page

## The Linux virtual memory model

1. What is?
   1. It uses a disk as an extension of RAM so that the effective size of usable memory grows correspondingly. The kernel writes the contents of currently unused block of memory to the hard disk so that the memory can be used for running applications.
2. Why virtual memory
   1. Each process can have a different memory memory known to itself
   2. Memory can be moved or swapped to disk
   3. Hardware device memory can be mapped into a process's address space with the help of kernel mapping
   4. Physical RAM can be mapped into multiple processes at once like shared memory
   5. Memory regions can have access permissions, read, write, execute
3. Efficiency of mapping performed in hardware
   1. No perf penalty for accessing already-mapped RAM regions
   2. Permissions are handled without penalty
   3. The same CPU instructions are used for accessing RAM and mapped hardware
   4. Software during its normal ops will only using virtual addresses.
4. MMU as a part of CPU handles all memory accesses from Load/Store instructions.
   1. TLB maps virtual to physical address.
   2. Page fault is generated if virtual address is not in the TLB and CPU will be interrupt to handle the fault.
   3. Page fault
      1. A CPU exception generated when software attempts to use an invalid virtual address
      2. Three cases
         1. VA is not mapped for the requesting process
         2. The process has insufficient permissions in the VA
         3. The VA is valid but swapped out
5. Kernel VM
   1. Virtual address space is split
      1. Upper part of VA is for kernel space and lower part for user space
      2. 32-bit is split at 0XC0000000 and the kernel uses the top 1GB of VA space and the user space uses bottom 3GB
      3. For 64-bit, the split varies. ARM64 is 0x8000000000000000 and X86_64 is 0xffff880000000000
   2. Kernel logical address
      1. Use kmalloc()
      2. Fixed offset from the physical address
      3. Virt: 0xc0000000 → Phys: 0x00000000
      4. **Can never be swapped out**
   3. Kernel virtual address
      1. Addresses in the region above the kernel logical address mapping and called the vmalloc() area
      2. Used for non-contiguous memory mappings and large buffers
      3. For
         1. memory-mapped IO
         2. Unsuitable for DMA. Use Logical address instead
6. User Virtual Addresses
   1. Addresses below **PAGE_OFFSET**
   2. Processes
      1. Each has
         1. its own mapping and threads share them.
         2. memory map struct mm, pointers to task_struct
            1. At context switch time, the process memory map is changed and is an overhead
      2. Makes full use of the MMU
         1. Portions of RAM are mapped
         2. Memory not contiguous, maybe swapped out and moved.
      3. Not suitable for
         1. DMA because VA are not guaranteed to be swapped in, or even allocated at all.
7. MMU
   1. Page
      1. A unit of memory sized and aligned at the **page size** defined by CPU and configured at kernel build time
   2. Page frame
      1. **Page sized** and **page aligned** physical memory block
   3. Operations
      1. Maps physical frames to virtual addresses and a mapping covers multiple pages
      2. TLB holds each mapping such as virtual address, physical address and permissions
   4. Page Fault generation
      1. MMU generates a page fault exception when a region of memory is not mapped but accessed. The kernel handles it as part of its memory management design.
      2. TLB takes a virtual address space and makes to a physical address space in different sizes multiple of defined system page size.
         1. Virtual contiguous VA may not be mapped to physically contiguous address
8. Shared memory
   1. Maps the **same physical frame** into two different processes's VA
      1. mmap() syscall allows the user space process to request a specific VA to map the shared memory region and a failure to grant mapping at this address will return failure
   2. Lazy allocation
      1. Kernel will not allocate pages requested by processes immediately.
         1. It will wait until those pages are actually used for performance optimization
      2. How it works?
         1. When memory is requested, the kernel simply creates a record of the request in its page tables and then returns (quickly) to the process without updating the TLB
         2. When that newly-allocated memory is touched, the CPU will generate a page fault because it doesn't know the mapping.
         3. In the page fault handler, the kernel uses its page tables to determine that the mapping is valid yet unmapped in the TLB.
         4. It allocates a physical page frame and update the TLB with the new mapping
         5. It returns from the exception handler and the user space program can resume
      3. Pre-faulted
         1. For processes that are time-sensitive, pages can be pre-faulted, or simply touched at the start of execution using mlock(), mlockall()
9. Page Tables
   1. Why?
      1. Entries in TLB are **limited resource** and kernel must keep track of all of the mappings all of the time
      2. It allows kernel to store all mapping info in the page tables. Data structures are struct_mm, vm_area_struct.
   2. How?
      1. When CPU accesses TLB and generates a page fault, kernel page fault handler executes
         1. Find an appropriate mapping for the offending address in the kernel's page tables
         2. Select and remove an existing TLB entry
         3. Create a TLB entry for the page containing the address
         4. Return the user space process
10. Swapping
    1. Why?
       1. When memory utilization is high, the kernel may swap some frames to disk to free up RAM. MMU makes this possible
       2. Kernel copies a frame to disk and remove its TLB entry and reuse that frame if accessed by another process.
          1. When it is needed again, the CPU generates a page fault since it's not in TLB
          2. The kernel can then at the page fault time, put the process to sleep, copy the frame from the disk to an unused frame in RAM, fix the page table entry and wake the process
11. User Space
    1. Ways to allocate memory
       1. Platform methods \*alloc() functions
       2. mmap() used to directly to allocate and map pages
       3. brk()/sbrk() used to increase the heap size
    2. mmap()
       1. Standard way to allocate large amounts of memory from user space
       2. flags
          1. MAP_ANONYMOUS
             1. causes mmap() to allocate normal memory for the process
          2. MAP_SHARED
             1. makes the allocated pages sharable with other processes
    3. brk()/sbrk()
       1. brk()
          1. sets the top of the **program break**, data segment
          2. Program break - end of the process's data segment
       2. sbrk()
          1. Increases the program break
       3. do_brk()
          1. Implemented similar to mmap() as it modifies the page tables for the new area, wait for the page fault and optionally pre-fault the new area and allocate it.
       4. Rules
          1. Small allocation use brk() and large allocation use mmap()
12. Stack Expansion

    1. How?
       1. If a process accesses memory beyond its stack, the CPU will trigger a page fault.
       2. Kernel page fault handler detects the address is just beyond the stack and allocates a new page to extend the stack.
    2. Located?
       1. arch/arm/mm/fault.c

## Techniques for resource control

1. CPU resource management
   1. nice
      1. manually lower the task's priority
      2. renice +[num] <PID>
         1. Add nice value to a PID
      3. `nice` <utility name>
         1. run a utility with a different nice value
   2. cpulimit
      1. Repeatedly pause the process so that it doesn't exceed a certain limit
         1. Achieved by sending SIGSTOP and SIGCONT signals to the process. No nice value change.
         2. It monitors and controls the real-world CPU usage.
      2. cpulimit -l 50 -p <pid>
   3. cgroup
      1. Linux's built-in control groups, a mechanism which tells the scheduler to limit the amount of resources available to the process.
      2. Advantage over nice or cpulimit
         1. limits applied to a **set of processes** rather than just one
      3. Create
         1. sudo cgcreate -g cpu:/<groupName>
            1. Sets this group to limit CPU resources
      4. Set
         1. sudo cgset -r cpu.shares=512 <groupName>
            1. Sets relative share value of cpu among all cgroups
      5. Exec
         1. sudo cgexec -g cpu:<groupName> /path/to/command
            1. Executes a command with the group name and its applied limit configuration
      6. Resources under control
         1. cpuset (sets of cpu cores), memory, blkio

## Common system troubleshooting tools and techniques

1. uptime
   1. Provides information about load average for past 1, 5 and 15 minutes. It considers processes in runnable state (**Uses CPU or waiting to be elaborated**) and uninterruptible state (**Waits for an I/O access**, like **disk reading data**)
      1. A number that showed must be compared to the number of cores available to the system.
         1. A value lower than the number of cores indicates a situation without problems
         2. A value greater than the number of cores indicates a saturation or overload state.
   2. It also provides number of users logged in via TTY and uptime of the system
2. dmesg -T | tail
   1. Shows the kernel buffer, which contains information on user space and kernel space errors.
   2. We can also grep for errors
3. vmstat
   1. Offers detailed information about processes, memory, paging, block I/O, disk and CPU activity
   2. Columns to consider
      1. `r`
         1. Stands for runnable processes.
            1. The number of active and queued process for each core, a better indicator than load averages found with uptime as **it doesn't include I/O requests**.
         2. A value greater than number of cores indicates saturation
      2. `b`
         1. Number of processes in uninterruptible sleep
      3. `free`
         1. Provides memory details in kilobytes.
         2. Running `free` command will give you additional memory details such as used, free, shared, buffer/cache and available and the swap memory used such as used, free.
      4. `si, so`
         1. Memory that's swapped into and out of the **swap disk**
      5. `bi, bo`
         1. Blocks received from and sent to a block device per second
      6. `in cs`
         1. Number of interrupts including clock per second
         2. Number of context switches per second
      7. `us, sy, id, wa, st`
         1. CPU stats
   3. Options
      1. `-a`
         1. Displays active and inactive memory
      2. `-m`
         1. Displays slabinfo, which is the cache for frequently used objects in the linux kernel.
         2. `cat /proc/slabinfo`
      3. `-s`
         1. Displays a table of various event counters and memory stats
      4. `-d`
         1. Displays disk statistics or you can use `iostat`
         2. Read
            1. total, total reads completed successfully
            2. merged, grouped reads (resulting in one I/O)
            3. sectors, sectors read successfully
            4. ms, milliseconds spent reading
      5. `-p`
         1. Display stats on a partition
      6. `-S`
         1. Change the unit to k, K, m, M
4. `mpstat -P ALL 1`
   1. Provides detailed data on the activities of each available core
   2. Columns to consider
      1. `usr, sys`
         1. execution percentage by user, by kernel.
      2. `iowait, guest, idle`
         1. idle time spent waiting for I/O requests, time spent for virtual processes, and time that processor was idle and system didn't have any disk I/O request
5. `pidstat 1`
   1. Provides information on active processes managed by the kernel every one second
   2. options
      1. `-d`
         1. adds disk io information
      2. `-C <command name>`
         1. displays processes with given command name
      3. `-r`
         1. reports page faults and memory utilization
         2. VSZ
            1. virtual memory usage of entire task in kilobytes
         3. RSS
            1. Resident Set Size, a non-swappable physical memory used by the task in kilobytes
            2. Working set = RSS + Cache
6. `iostat -xz`
   1. Provides information about block devices (disks), useful to understand work loadsand performances derived to I/O systems.
   2. Options
      1. `-x`
         1. show extended information
      2. `-z`
         1. Excludes devices with no activity for simpler output
   3. Columns to consider
      1. `r/s, w/s rkB/s, wkB/s`
         1. Reading and writing operations, kbyte read and writes per second. Useful indicators of the work load.
      2. `await`
         1. The time that penalizes an application and includes both queue time and usage time. Values greater than the expected indicate saturation or faults
      3. `avgqu-sz`
         1. Indicates the average requests sent to the device. Greater than 1 might indicate saturation.
      4. `%util`
         1. Device usage percentage. Greater than 60 is a signal of bad performance
7. `free -m`
   1. Shows several information about the usage state of RAM memory
8. `sar -n DEV 1`
   1. Shows working state of network
   2. rxpck/s, txpck/s
      1. Received and sent packets per second
   3. %iful
      1. percentage usage of the interface
9. `sar -n TCP,ETCP 1`
   1. TCP and ETCP (errorTCP) offers metrics about TCP connections that are started, accepted, retransmitted per second
10. `atop`
    1. Provides an overview of the system. The output is divided into two parts
       1. Upper part provides information on a system level
       2. Lower part provides information a single process level

## How System calls works

1. Processes are confined to its own memory or sandbox and its instructions to invoke a system call breaks out of its sandbox.
2. How processes breaks out of its own memory?
   1. In the syscall instruction, the process specifies the number for the system call to invoke and that causes **CPU go and look up an address** which corresponds to that number in a **special table**
   2. The kernel code and the table for the syscalls are placed inside the address space of each process, usually at the top of the address space and the stack starts immediately below it
   3. Kernel code and table for syscalls are marked inaccessible to processes in virtual memory pages.
   4. Only when a process makes a syscall via special instruction does execution proceed to kernel code.
   5. When syscall is invoked it uses the stack of the process to place a stack frame for that syscall. The purpose of this is to allow syscalls to execute in the context of the process which invokes them and avoids a context switch, meaning one doesn't have to swap out the memory tables of the current process. This allows syscalls to be naturally interrupted - **suspended and resumed later.**

## What are types of IPC

1. File
   1. A record stored on disk, or a record synthesized on demand by a file server, which can be accessed by multiple processes.
2. Signal
   1. A system message sent from one process to another, not usually used to transfer data but instead used to remotely command the partnered process.
3. Socket
   1. Data sent over a network interface, either to a different process on the same computer or to another computer on the network. Stream-oriented (TCP; data written through a socket requires formatting to preserve message boundaries) or more rarely message-oriented (UDP, SCTP).
4. Unix domain socket
   1. Similar to an internet socket but all communication occurs within the kernel. Domain sockets use the file system as their address space. Processes reference a domain socket as an inode, and multiple processes can communicate with one socket
5. Message queue
   1. A data stream similar to a socket, but which usually preserves message boundaries. Typically implemented by the operating system, they allow multiple processes to read and write to the message queue without being directly connected to each other.
6. Pipe
   1. A unidirectional data channel. Data written to the write end of the pipe is buffered by the operating system until it is read from the read end of the pipe. Two-way data streams between processes can be achieved by creating two pipes utilizing standard input and output.
7. Named pipe
   1. A pipe implemented through a file on the file system instead of standard input and output. Multiple processes can read and write to the file as a buffer for IPC data.
8. Shared memory
   1. Multiple processes are given access to the same block of memory which creates a shared buffer for the processes to communicate with each other.
9. Message passing
   1. Allows multiple programs to communicate using message queues and/or non-OS managed channels, commonly used in concurrency models.
10. Memory-mapped file
    1. A file mapped to RAM and can be modified by changing memory addresses directly instead of outputting to a stream. This shares the same benefits as a standard file.

# TODOs

- Try real world troubleshooting on your own server
- Try understand the meaning of outputs produced by different system admin/troubleshooting commands such iostat/vmstat/top/netstat/dmesg/sysctl, performance commands such as "perf", concepts of system calls such as exec, ioctl, and many different system logging
