# Abstract

- This document explores essential networking concepts and their respective tools and usage

## Theory and Understanding

1. Basic network protocols, such as ICMP, TCP, and UDP
   - ICMP - Internet Control Message Protocol
     - Def
       - Uses the basic support of IP as if it were a higher level protocol and is actually an integral part of IP and must be implemented by every IP module.
     - Why ICMP exists
       - IP is not absolutely reliable.
       - ICMP provides feedback about problems in the communication environment not to make IP reliable.
     - How it works
       - ICMP messages are sent using the basic IP header.
         - Sets protocol to be 1, which means ICMP.
         - Sets IPv4 header version, IHL, Type of Service, Total Length, Identification, Flags, and Fragment Offset, TTL, checksum, source and destination address.
       - Payload
         - Type 3 - Destination Unreachable Message
           - Code 0-5 for net unreachable, host unreachable, protocol unreachable, port unreachable, fragmentation needed and DF set, source route failed
           - Code 2,3 may be received from a host and the rest may be received from a gateway
         - Type 11 - Time Exceeded Message
           - Code 0-1, time to live exceeded in transit, fragment reassembly time exceeded
             - If the gateway processing a datagram finds the TTL field is zero it must discard the datagram and notify the source host with code 1. If a host reassembling a fragmented datagram cannot complete the assembly due to missing fragments within its time limit then code 1
           - Code 0 may be received from a gateway and code 1 may be received from a host.
         - Type 12 - Parameter Problem Message
           - Code 0, pointer to an error.
           - Pointer identifies the octect of the original datagram's header where the error was detected and may be received from a gateway or a host
         - Type 4 - Source Quench Message
         - Type 0 - Echo Reply Message
         - Type 8 - Echo Message (request)
         - Type 13 - Timestamp message
         - Type 14 - Timestamp reply message
         - Type 15 - Information Request
         - Type 16 - Information Reply
   - TCP
     - Characteristics
       - TCP/IP provides reliable, ordered and error-checked delivery of a stream of octets between applications running on hosts communicating via an IP network.
     - Connection Establishment
       - SYN, SYN-ACK, ACK
     - Connection Termination
       - FIN, ACK, FIN, ACK
     - Resource Usage
       - Most implementation allocate an entry in a table that maps a session to a running operating system process. The number of sessions in the server side is limited only by memory and can grow as new connections arrive, but the client must allocate a random port before sending the first SYN to the server.
     - Data Transfer
       - Ordered data transfer, retransmission of lost packets, error-free data transfer, flow control, congestion control
     - Reliable transmission
       - Uses a sequence number to identify each byte of data
     - Dupack-based, timeout-based retransmission
     - Error detection - checksum
     - Flow control
       - E2E flow control protocol used to avoid having the sender send data too fast for the TCP receiver to receive and process it reliably.
     - Congestion control
       - Sender infers network conditions using presence or lack of acknowledgements for data sent.
     - Maximum segment Size
       - The largest amount of data specified in bytes that TCP is willing to receive in a single segment.
   - UDP
     - Definition
       - A simple connectionless communication model with a minimum of protocol mechanism. It provides checksums for data integrity and port numbers for addressing different functions at the source and destination of the datagram.
     - Attributes
       - Transaction-oriented and suitable for simple query-response protocols such as Domain Name System or the Network Time Protocol
       - Datagrams suitable for modeling other protocols such as IP tunneling or remote procedure call and the NFS.
       - It's simple, suitable for bootstrapping such as DHCP and TFTP
       - It's stateless suitable for very large numbers of clients such as in streaming media applications
       - Lack of retransmission delays makes it suitable for real-time applications such as VoIP, online games, and many protocols using Real Time Streaming Protocol
       - Multicast supported, suitable for broadcast information such as in many kinds of service discovery, and shared information such as Precision Time Protocol and Routing Information Protocol
2. How packets are constructed?
   - A message is chopped up into segments and passed one by one to the network layer.
   - The network layer adds a header to each packet and passes it to the link layer (Ethernet) which handles frames
   - Conclusion
     - Messages - application layer
     - Segments - transport layer
       - TCP fragments within size specified in MTU for Ethernet
       - UDP will delegate fragmentation to IP layer
     - Packets - network layer
     - frames - link layer
       - Switch operates at this layer and takes network nodes' MAC address for forwarding
3. TCP/IP connection establishment and teardown
   - Connection Establishment
     - Before a client attempts to connect with a server, the server must first bind to and listen at a port to open it up for connections, a passive open.
     - Three-way handshake
       - SYN => The active open is performed by the client sending a SYN to the server. The client sets the segment's sequence number to **a random number A**.
       - SYN-ACK => The server replies with a SYN-ACK. The **acknowledgement number** is set to one more than the **received sequence number (A+1)**, and the sequence number that the server chooses for the packet is another **random number B**.
       - ACK => The client ACK back. The sequence number is set to the **received acknowledgement value A+1**, and the **acknowledge number** is set to one more than the **received sequence number (B+1)**
         - Here, step 1,2 establishes connection param, seq number, in one direction and step 2,3 establishes connection param, seq number, in the other direction.
   - Connection Teardown
     - Four-way handshake
       - When an endpoint wishes to stop its half of connection, it transmits a FIN packet. Then the other end acknowledges with an ACK. This happens both side in order to terminate.
     - Three-way handshake
       - host A sends a FIN and host B replies with FIN & ACK and host A replies with ACK.
     - Two-way handshake
       - Both sides send FIN and ACK packets at the same time
     - Notes
       - The **side which sent the first FIN** before receiving one **waits** for a timeout before finally closing the connection, during which time the local port is unavailable for new connections; This prevents delayed packets being delivered during subsequent connections.
         - S (FIN_WAIT_1) => FIN => D (CLOSE_WAIT)
         - S (FIN_WAIT_2) <= ACK <= D
         - S (TIME_WAIT) <= FIN <= D (FIN_WAIT)
         - S => ACK => D
       - A connection can be "half-open" in which one side has terminated its end, but the other has not. The side that has terminated can no longer send any data into the connection, but the other side can.
4. How common internet application protocols such as DNS, HTTP, and DHCP are designed, how they work in practice, and common pitfalls with them.
   - DNS
     - What is?
       - Foundations of the Internet
       - More than 330 million names listed at the end of 2017
     - How is it designed and work
       - DNS is designed as a client/server network communication systems where DNS clients send the requests to and receive the response from DNS servers. A request that contains a domain name and returns IP address is **forward DNS lookup** and a request that contains IP address and returns domain name is **reverse DNS lookup**
       - DNS supports caching the request for redundancy.
     - Advantages
       - Allows you to browse & use Internet and good for search engines to index and categorize pages
       - A form of load balancing or an additional layers of security
       - Dynamic secure updates, zero downtime, fast and connected well at intersections of Internet.
     - Pitfalls
       - Hierarchical & centralized form breaks down the main objective of Internet as a decentralized system. ICANN, with ties to one specific nation, can control the DNS root registry.
       - If DNS breaks down, it will crash the world wide web.
       - DNS issues can be difficult to troubleshoot due to its geographical & distributed nature.
       - DNS hijacking - Malware can change your DNS server settings, entering the same URL might take you to a malicious website.
       - DNS reflection attack
       - DNS cache poisoning
       - DNS resource exhaustion
         - An attack that clogs the DNS infrastructure of ISPs, blocking ISP's customers from reaching sites on the Internet. This can be done by attackers registering domain name and using the victim's name server as the domain's authoritative server. So if a recursive resolver can't supply the IP address associated with the site name, it will ask the name server of the victim. Attackers generate large numbers of requests for their domain and toss in non-existent subdomains to boot, which leads to a torrent of resolution requests being fired at the victim's name server, overwhelming it.
         - DNS Security Extensions is an effort to make the communication among the various levels of servers involved in DNS lookups more secure and is devised by ICANN.
   - HTTP
     - What is?
       - HTTP/1.x(h1) standardized in 1999 and HTTP/2(h2) standardized in 2015 are designed to transfer information like document, file, image, video between computers over the Internet.
       - Client-server protocol by which two machines communicate using a reliable, connection-oriented transport service such as TCP.
       - It is a protocol designed to transmitting data via a two way TCP connection using HTTP verbs, headers, body and encoding accept response, cache and more...
     - Advantages
       - Platform independent which allows straight cross platform porting and no runtime required. No network overhead to create and maintain session state and information.
       - Enables multiple connections to download separate elements, each with its own assigned particular file type, concurrently and thus speeds up transmission.
       - Addressing of name to IP addresses makes WWW commercially viable.
       - File type notification precedes data transmission and allows quick extensions or plugins download if additional capabilities are needed to display the data.
       - Ease of programming as HTTP is coded in plain text and therefore easier to follow and implement than protocols that make use of codes that require lookups. Data is formatted in lines of text and not as strings of variables or fields
       - Search Capabilities for SQL searches and return results conveniently formatted in an HTML document
       - Persistent Connections - in HTTP 1.1, there is the ability to maintain an open connection for several requests. The concept of "pipelining" was added enabling many requests to be sent to the receiving computer before the first request is served. They speed up the response time for delivering a Web page.
       - HTTP2 has header compression, supports push model,
     - Drawbacks
       - No integrity and anyone can easily alter with the content subject to MITM attack.
   - DHCP
     - What is? & design
       - Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol works based on client/server architecture.
       - Assigns IP addresses to reqeuesting hosts or clients dynamically on demand basis
       - It uses UDP port number 67 for destination server and 68 for the client.
       - Supports local and remote client using BOOTP relay
     - Advantages
       - Is easy to implement and does automatic assignment of IP addresses to requesting clients. Hence it's a huge time saver
       - Duplicate or invalid assignment of IP addresses are prevented
       - Simplifies admin work and supports multiple scopes
     - Drawbacks
       - DHCP server can be **a single point of failure** in networks having **only one configured DHCP server**.
       - DHCP packets cannot travel across router and a relay agent is necessary to have DHCP server handle all leases on both network segments.
       - No Security as DHCP server has no secure mechanism for authentication of the client.
       - The machine name stays the same when new IP address is assigned
       - The client will not be able to access the network in the absence of the DHCP server
5. How to design your own application networking protocol, or changes you might recommend to existing application networking protocols.

   - I would like to envision an improved TCP protocol with additional features such as high DoS security protection and network authentication built in.

6. IPv4/IPv6 differences

   - Number of addresses
     - IPv4 - 32-bits supports 2^32, 4.29 \* 10^9, 4.29 billion IP addresses.
     - IPv6 - 128-bits supports 2^128, 3.4 x 10^38 addresses.
   - IPv6
     - Developed by IETF intended to replace IPv4.
     - Features
       - It permits hierarchical address allocation methods that facilitates route aggregation across the Internet, and thus limit the expansion of routing tables.
       - Expanded and simplified the use of multicast addressing.
       - Provides additional optimization for delivery of services.
       - Device mobility, security, and configuration aspects have been considered in the protocol design.
       - Simplifies aspects of address assignment, network numbering, and router announcements when changing network connectivity providers. It simplifies processing of packets in routers by placing the responsibility for packet fragmentation into the end points.
       - No specification for interoperability features with IPv4 but essentially creates a parallel, independent network. Translator required to exchange traffic between IPv4 and IPv6 using NAT64, tunneling protocol like 6to4..
     - Addressing
       - Rules
         - One or more leading zeroes from any groups of hexadecimal digits are removed; this is usually done to either all or none of the leading zeroes. For example, the group 0042 is converted to 42.
         - Consecutive sections of zeroes are replaced with a double colon (::). The double colon may only be used once in an address, as multiple use would render the address indeterminate. RFC 5952 recommends that a double colon not be used to denote an omitted single section of zeroes.
       - Ex
         - Initial address: 2001:0db8:0000:0000:0000:ff00:0042:8329
         - After removing all leading zeroes in each group: 2001:db8:0:0:0:ff00:42:8329
         - After omitting consecutive sections of zeroes: 2001:db8::ff00:42:8329
       - Loopback
         - 0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0001, may be abbreviated to ::1
       - DNS
         - AAAA resource records
     - Adoption
       - September 2013, about 4% of domain names and 16.2% of the network on the Internet has IPv6 protocol support
       - 2014, IPv4 still carried more than 99% of worldwide Internet traffic.

7. Host and application level networking options in Linux/UNIX, and where and how they are used

   - /etc/resolv.conf => DNS servers list
   - /etc/hosts => lists of host to be resolved locally
   - /etc/network/interfaces => network configuration and devices specification
   - netstat -rn => show routes netstat -i, show interfaces
   - netstat -t => show tcp connections

8. How load balancing works, different load balancing methods, and pros and cons of each.

   - How it works
     - Improves the distribution of workloads across multiple computing resources, such as computers, a computer cluster, network links, central processing units, or disk drives.
     - Increase reliability and availability through redundancy.
   - Load balancing methods
     - Round-robin DNS
       - A method of load balancing, which does not require a dedicated software or hardware node.
     - DNS delegation
       - Multiple sub-domain serving the same domain.
     - Client-side random load balancing
       - Delivers a list of server IPs to the client and then have client randomly select the IP from the list on each connection.
       - Tends to be better than round-robin DNS because client-side random selection remains unaffected regardless of DNS caching.
     - Server-side load balancers
       - Server-side load balancer is usually software program listening on a port where external clients connect to access services.
       - It distributes client side requests to the backend servers.
   - Features
     - Asymmetric load - A ratio that is manually assigned to cause some backend servers to get a greater share of the workload than others.
     - Priority activation - when too much load, bring up new servers online
     - SSL Offload and Acceleration - A SSL termination layer to offload CPU computation on backend web servers.
     - DDoS attack protection
     - HTTP compression - using gzip compression
     - TCP offload, buffering, direct server return, health checking, http caching, http security, priority queuing, content-aware switching, client authentication, programming traffic manipulation, firewall, IPS

9. Basic network design concepts

   - Business Requirement - Network
     - Should stay up all the time
     - Should reliably deliver applications and provide reasonable response times from any host to any host
     - Should be secure and it should protect data that is transmitted over it
     - Should be easy to modify to adapt to network growth and general business changes
     - Troubleshooting should be easy.
   - Types
     - P2P
       - All nodes are equal and any node can talk to any other node.
       - It's easier to setup, no dependency, more resilient, better network traffic distribution, no central admin and less expensive hardware. However, it's less secure or difficult to secure, difficult to administer and backup and locate information.
     - Client Server
       - A client connects to a server to use the appropriate services
       - It's easy to find resources as they are on a dedicated node, easy to secure administer and backup. However, servers are a single point of failure, expensive hardware required and network traffic get concentrated
   - Network Sizes
     - PAN - Linking local devices, PC to printer
     - LAN - Links devices in an office or offices
     - MAN - Links devices across multiple buildings like campus
     - WAN - Links devices across a country/countries

10. Problem Solving

    - Common host-level networking troubleshooting scenarios
    - How — and where — to use network troubleshooting tools such as tcpdump/Wireshark, ping, and traceroute.

11. What's Under the hood
    - ping
      - It sends a small packet containing an ICMP ECHO_REQUEST to a specified computer, which then sends an ECHO_REPLY packet in return for sucecss.
    - traceroute
      - Construct packets and incrementally increase TTL from 1 to when it reaches the target host. The TTL when decremented to 0, the terminating node will construct and return a new packet with ICMP "time exceed" message.
    - tcpdump -> load the pcap into Wireshark
      - tcpdump -i <interface> -c <packet_num> -w <file_to_write>
      - tcpdump -i <interface> [src|dst <src_ip>][port <port_num>]

## Topic-based Research

1. Network Packet Routing

   1. Theory
      1. Router, how it works, hops
         1. A router has two types of network network components organized onto separate planes.
            1. **Control plane, maintains a routing table that lists which route should be used to forward a data packet, and through which physical interface connection.** It does this using preconfigured directives called static routes, or by learning routes dynamically using routing protocol. Both route types are stored in the routing table. It strips non-essential directives from the table and builds a forwarding information base to be used by the forwarding plane
            2. **Forwarding plane, forwards data packets between incoming and outgoing interface connections.** It forwards them to the correct network type using information that the packet header contains matched to entries in the FIB supplied by the control plane.
      2. Difference between switching, routing and flooding
         1. Routing - the process of selecting a path for traffic in a network, or between or **across multiple networks**. There are five routing schemes, **unicast, broadcast, multicast, anycast(any of an interested group), geocast**. It uses routing table to determine destination host. OSI layer 3
         2. Switching - involves moving packets between devices **on the same network**. It **use/maintains a database of MAC address to route packet to the destination**. OSI layer 2.
            1. Flooding - forwarding by a router of a packet from any node to every other node attached to a switch or router. **Flooding happens when a switch's MAC database is overloaded**.
      3. **Route table - destination, gateway, genmask, flags, iface**
         1. Destination and genmask describes the network id, or destination subnet
         2. Gateway contains the information as the next hop
         3. iface is the locally available network interface for reaching gateway.
      4. How a packet travels inside its network
         1. **src node first broadcasts out ARP request to get the MAC of the destination IP you want to hit.**
         2. **Then it constructs a packet with L2 header to the specific MAC address. Data link layer**
      5. How a packet travels outside its network
         1. **Router/Gateway uses its forwarding tables to determine where a packet should go and the router will send the packet out along an appropriate route.**
      6. Routing Protocols
         1. **RIP (Routing Information Protocol) - Routing table broadcast**
            1. **Small Size Network**
            2. One of the oldest distance vector routing protocols which employ the hop count as a routing metric
         2. **OSPF (Open Shortest Path First) - Graph algorithm to only update delta network changes, no hop limit**
            1. **Large Size Network**
            2. A routing protocol for IP networks. It **uses a link state routing (LSR) algorithm and falls into the group of interior gateway protocol (IGPs) with a single autonomous system (AS)**
         3. **BGP - Border Gateway Protocol**
            1. **Inter-network communication**
            2. A standardized **exterior gateway protocol** designed to **exchange routing and reachability information among autonomous system (AS) on the Internet**. Path vector protocol.
            3. **Routing decisions made based on paths, network policies, or rule-sets configured by a network administrator and is involved in making core routing decisions**.
      7. Convergence - Network
         1. The state of a set of router that have the same topological information about the internetwork in which they operate.
         2. For a set of routers to have converged, they must have collected all available topology information from each other via the implemented routing protocol, the information they gathered must not contradict any other router's topology information in the set and must reflect the real state of the network.

2. CLIs

   1. route
      1. display route table with metrics flags, metrics, ....
      2. route add, delete, flush to configure route
      3.
   2. dhclient
      1. dhclient -r -i <iface>, stops dhclient and its lease
      2. dhclient -4 -i <iface>, renew IPv4 lease
      3. dhclient -i <iface>
   3. arp
      1. Can delete all arp entries, query or add
   4. ifconfig
      1. Finds out configuration of an interface add new interfaces etc...
   5. ifup, ifdown
      1. bring up/down an interface
   6. ip
      1. ip operations such as route

3. Host Name address translation - DNS
   1. What's DNS
      1. Domain Name System provides mapping between human readable names and their associated IP addresses.
      2. Top Level Domain (TLD)
         1. Last part of a domain name such as .com, .net, .edu, etc..
      3. Second Level Domain
         1. Name before TLD such as amazon in amazon.com
      4. Sub Domain
         1. Name that identifies unique content areas of a website such as aws in aws.amazon.com
      5. Domain Name Registrar
         1. Critical to how DNS works
         2. ICANN (The Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers) grants organizations to act as domain name registrars for specific higher level domains
      6. Name Server
         1. A phone book, a collection of domain names matched to IP addresses
      7. DNS Record types
         1. A Record - Maps IP addresses to domain names
         2. CNAME - Establishes one domain as an alias to another, essentially routing all traffic addressed to the alias to the target, the canonical address)
         3. Alias Record - Like a CNAME record, used to map one address to another, but different in that it can coexist with other records using the same name
         4. MX Record - Mail Exchange Record. Redirects a domain's email to the servers hosting the domain's user accounts and is used for determining the priority of email servers for a domain.
   2. DNS Components
      1. Name Server
      2. Zone File
      3. Resource Records
   3. DNS process
      1. Local DNS Server
      2. Root DNS Servers
      3. Top-Level Domain
      4. Authoritative DNS Server
   4. Theory
      1. BIND
         1. The most widely used DNS software on the Internet. It performs both the main DNS server roles, acting as an authoritative name server for one or more specific domains or more specific domains, acting as a recursive resolver for the DNS system generally.
      2. DNSmasq
         1. A lightweight easy to configure DNS forwarder, designed to provide DNS (optionally DHCP and TFTP) services to a small scale network. It can serve the names of local machines which are not in the global DNS
         2. Dnsmasq supports modern Internet standards such as IPv6 and DNSSEC, network booting with support for BOOTP, PXE and TFTP and also Lua scripting.
      3. PowerDNS
         1. A DNS server written in C++ features a large number of different backends ranging from simple BIND style zonefiles to relational databases and load balancing/failover algorithms. A DNS recursor is provided as a separate program.
   5. Files
      1. /etc/hosts
         1. Used to locally resolve domain name to ip address
      2. /etc/resolv.conf
         1. Used to store information related to DNS hostname resolution configuration such as namesever, domain
   6. Tools
      1. nslookup
         1. nslookup <domain_name> <dns_ip>
            1. Resolves a domain name using a specific DNS.
      2. dig
         1. dig <example.com> any
            1. Finds all of the DNS entries for a specific domain
