# Abstract

- This document explores aspects of MySQL, MongoDB, Cassandra, HBase, Redis, Memcached and NewSQL

## MySQL

1. What is & history
   1. A project under the terms of the GNU General Public License and now owned by Oracle Corporation
   2. A central component of the LAMP open-source web application software stack - Linux, Apache, MySQL, Perl/PHP/Python. It is used by many CMSs and large scale websites like Facebook, Google, Twitter.
   3. Written in C and C++. SQL parser is written in yacc and works across OSs.
   4. Great reviews, performance and documentation and is a true fast, stable and true multi-user, multi-threaded sql database server.
   5. MariaDB is a fork of MySQL
   6. MySQL 5.6 announced in Feb 2013 with new features to add performance improvements to the query optimizer, higher transactional throughput in **InnoDB**, new NoSQL-style memcached APIs, improvements to partitioning for querying and managing very large tables. InnoDB storage engine included support for full-text search and improved group commit performance.
   7. MySQL Server 8.0 is announced in 2018 including NoSQL Document Store, atomic and crash safe DDL sentences and JSON Extended syntax, new functions, such as JSON table functions, improved sorting and partial updates.
   8. Facebook uses MySQL InnoDB primarily through sharding, parallel processing, central backup control units for each rack, xtrabackup for making slaves, mysqdump for backup easily with differential format.
2. Features
   1. Triggers, Cursors, Updatable Views.
   2. Information Schema, ACID, SSL support
   3. Query caching, partioned tables with pruning
   4. Native Storage engines, commit grouping
3. Backup
   1. mysqldump is a logical backup tool included with both community and enterprise editions of MySQL.
   2. XtraBackup is an open-source MySQL hot backup software program. Features include hot, non-locking backups for InnoDB storage, incremental backups, streaming, parallel-compressed backups, throttling based on the number of I/O operations per second, etc.
4. HA
   1. MySQL Fabric is an integrated system for managing a collection of MySQL servers, and a framework on top of which HA and database sharding is built. It's open source and supports procedure execution in the presence of failure, providing an execution model usually called resilient execution.
   2. MySQL client client libraries are extended so they are hiding the complexities of handling failover in the event of a server failure, as well as correctly dispatching transactions to the shard.

## MongoDB

1. What is
   1. A free open source cross platform document-oriented database. It uses JSON like documents
2. Features
   1. Ad hoc queries - Supports field, range query and regex searches.
   2. **Indexing** - fields in a MongoDB document can be indexed with primary and secondary indices.
   3. **Replication** - HA with replica sets which consist of two or more copies of the data each may act as primary or secondary at any time. Replica failover is done automatically via an election process.
   4. **Load balancing** - Scales horizontally using sharding and user chooses a shard key which determines how the dat in a collection will be distributed. For even data distribution, the shard key can be hashed to map to a shard
   5. File Storage - GridFS with load balancing and data replication features over multiple machines for storing files.
   6. Aggregation - Three ways to perform aggregation. Aggregation pipeline, the map-reduce function, and single-purpose aggregation methods.
   7. Server-side JS execution
   8. Capped collections - A type of collection maintains insertion order and once the specified size has been reached behaves like a circular queue.
   9. Transactions - Multi-document ACID transactions were added with the General Availability of 4.0 release in June 2018
3. Concerns
   1. Default security configuration of MongoDB allows anyone to have full access to the database. Because of this, data from tens of thousands of MongoDB installations has been stolen.
   2. In some situations, reads and writes will yield their locks. If MongoDB predicts a page is unlikely to be in memory, operations will yield their lock while the page load.
   3. MongoDB queries against an index are not atomic and can miss documents which are being updated while the query is running and match the query both before and after an update.

## Apache Cassandra

1. What is
   1. A free open-source distributed wide column store NoSQL database management system design to handle large amounts of data across many commodity servers, providing HA with no single point of failure. Written in Java.
   2. A wide column store is a type of NoSQL database that uses tables, rows, and columns. Unlike RDS, the names and format of the columns can vary from row to row in the same table. A wide column store can be interpreted as a two dimensional key-value store.
      1. Examples are Apache Cassandra, HBase, BigTable, DynamoDB, Azure Tables
2. Feature updates
   1. Integrated caching, secondary indexes and online schema changes
   2. Cassandra Query Languages, self-tuning memtables, and zero-downtime upgrades
   3. Integrated compression, leveled compaction
   4. self-tuning caches, row-level isolation
   5. Clustering across virtual nodes, inter-node communication, atomic batches, and request tracing.
   6. Lightweight transactions based on Paxos consensus protocol, trigger
3. Main Features
   1. Distributed - Every node in the cluster has the same role and no single point of failure. No master and every node can service any request
   2. Supports replication and multi data center replication, redundancy and failover - Replication strategies are configurable designed as a distributed system for deployment of large numbers of nodes across multiple data centers.
   3. Scalability - Designed to have read and write throughput both increase linearly as new machines are added with the aim of no downtime or interruption to applications.
   4. Tunable consistency - Typically classified as AP system
   5. MapReduce support - Hadoop integration with MapReduce support.

## HBase

1. What is
   1. An open source, non-relational distributed database modeled after Google's Bigtable written in Java runs on top of HDFS providing a fault tolerant way of storing large quantities of sparse data.
   2. It features compression, in-memory operation, and Bloom filters on a per-column basis.
      1. Bloom filters is a space efficient probabilistic data structure used to test whether an element is a member of a set in which false positive matches are possible but false negatives are not
   3. HBase runs on top of HDFS and is well-suited for faster read and write operations on large datasets with high throughput and low input/output latency.
   4. HBase is now serving several data-driven websites, but Facebook's Messaging Platform recently migrated from HBase to MyRocks.
   5. It is a CP type system

## RocksDB

1. What is
   1. A high perf on disk embedded database for key-value data.
   2. It's a fork of LevelDB which was then optimized to exploit many CPU cores and make efficient use of fast storage such as SSD for I/O bound workloads.
   3. It is based on a log-structured merge-tree LSM data structure written in C++ with many official API language bindings
   4. It is open sourced and is used in production systems at various web scale enterprises including Facebook, Yahoo and LinkedIn
2. Features
   1. Stores keys and values in arbitrary byte arrays and data is sorted by key. It supports batching writes forward and backward iteration, compression.
   2. Transactions, backups, snapshots
   3. Column families, bloom filters
   4. TTL support, universal compaction
   5. Merge operators, statistics collection
   6. Geospatial indexing
3. Integration
   1. Can be integrated as storage engine for solutions such as MongoDB, CockroachDB, MySQL, Cassandra.
   2. Can be as embedded storage engine for ArrangoDB, LogDevice LogsDB, ...

## Redis

1. What is
   1. Remote Dictionary Server is an open source in memory database implementing a distributed, in memory key value store with optional durability.
   2. Supports abstract data structures such as strings, lists, maps, sets, sorted sets, hyperloglogs, bitmaps, and spatial indexes.
   3. It supports many languages and holds whole dataset in memory. However, it can be configured to do snapshotting and semi persistent durability where the dataset is asynchronously transferred from meory to disk.
2. Properties
   1. Persistence - By default writes data to a FS every 2 seconds
   2. Replication - Supports master-slave replication. A slave may be a master to another slave allowing Redis to implement a single-rooted replication tree.
   3. Performance - When the durability of data is not needed, the in-memory nature of Redis allows it perform well compared to database systems that write every change to disk before considering a transaction committed. It operates as a single process and is single threaded or double threaded when it rewrites the AOF. It cannot utilize parallel execution of tasks such as stored procedures.
   4. Clustering - Introduced in 2015 version 3.0. Under cluster specification, all single key commands are available, multi-key operations are restricted to keys belonging to the same node, and commands related to database selection operations are unavailable.
   5. Use Cases - Session caching, full page cache, message queue applications, leaderboards and counting among others.

## Memcached

1. What is
   1. A general purpose distributed memory caching system used to speed up dynamic database driven websites by caching data and objects in RAM to reduce the number of times an external data source must be read.
   2. First developed in 2003 and is now used by many other systems including YouTube, Reddit, Facebook, Pinterest, Twitter, Wikipedia.
   3. It's a client-server architecture where the server maintain a key-value associative array. The clients populate this array and query it by key. Keys are upto 250 bytes long and values can be at most 1 MB in size.
2. Properties
   1. Security - SASL authentication support
   2. Scalability - A simple form of sharding and scalable shared-nothing architecture across the servers. **The client computes hash of the key to determine which server to use and the server computes a second hash of the key to determine where to store or read corresponding value**. Values are stored in RAM and it discards oldest value.

## NewSQL

1. What is
   1. A class of **modern relational database management systems** that seek to provide the same scalable performance of NoSQL systems for **OLTP read-write workloads** while still **maintaining ACID guarantees** of a traditional database system.
2. History
   1. Many enterprise systems that handle high-profile data also need to be able to scale but are unable to use NoSQL solutions because they cannot give up strong transactional and consistency requirements. The only options available for enterprises were to either purchase a more powerful single-node machine or develop custom middleware that distributes queries over traditional DBMS nodes.
3. System Design
   1. OLTP applications uses - large transactions:
      1. short-lived
      2. touch a small subset of data using index lookups (no full table scans or large distributed joins)
      3. Repetitive (executing the same queries with different inputs).
   2. New Architecture - Designed to operate in a distributed cluster of shared-nothing nodes, in which each node owns a subset of the data. These database are often written from scratch with a distributed architecture in mind, and include components such as distributed concurrency control, flow control, distributed query processing. Ex, Google Spanner, CockroachDB,..
   3. SQL Engines - Highly optimized storage engines for SQL. Provide same API as SQL but scale better for built-in engines such as InnoDB. Ex. MySQL Cluster, Infobright, TokuDB, MyRocks...
   4. Transparent sharding - the systems provide a sharding middleware layer to automatically split databases across multiple nodes.
