5. Soft Skills

- Abstract
  - You’ll meet with one of the Production Engineering managers, and they will ask you questions about any significant projects you have worked on to get a feel of your capabilities and how you work on teams and with other groups across an organization. There may also be questions to learn more about how you’ve dealt with conflicts in the past or to describe a project you worked on that brings you pride. The questions “why Facebook” and “what is your understanding of production engineering” will also likely be asked.
- Todo
  - Production Engineers partner with their teammates, software engineers, project managers, and other Facebookers every day. During this interview, we want to learn how you have worked in a team, deal with conflict, and overcome challenges. For recent graduates, we’ll discuss any internships, as well as interesting academic and side projects. Unlike the technical interviews for coding, systems and design, this interview focuses on your unique experiences and approaches to solving non-technical problems. For this interview, you’ll be meeting with a leader in Production Engineering.
  - Prepare for:
    - Quick “elevator pitch”, high-level descriptions of completed or in progress projects.
    - Clear descriptions of your role in the projects, who you worked with, and the challenges you faced, rather than what the specific work was.
    - Things don’t always go as planned, so think through failures you’ve encountered in the past. Share what could have been done differently and what you learned from the experience.
    - Your reasons and motivations for why you changed roles in the past and why you find PE exciting. If you’re currently a software engineer, or other type of engineer, think through why Production Engineering is a good fit for you. Pedro’s SREcon talk is a great resource for understanding Production Engineering.
      - Touching all stacks and handling real world problems with planet scale impacts.
  - Work through all of below:
    - Tell me about a recent project you are proud of.
    - Tell me about a design decision you made that you later regretted.
    - Tell me about a disagreement or conflict between you and a coworker.
    - What motivates you to leave your current role?
    - Describe your ideal day at work.
    - What is your understanding of Production Engineering?
      - A PE knows how systems that's built and to-be-built works in production and is the first to understand why systems go down and fix them on the fly. and fixes
    - Why PE?
      - It quickens an engineer's understanding how systems work and their interactions in a highly distributed and reliable "production" environment.
      - It makes you a better engineer by making you to conceptualize and understand how low level systems operations are actually carried instead relying on a layer of abstraction provided by programming languages.
      - It allows you to understand systems and services as a whole, how they interact and scale, and where the weak points are.
      - Allows me to be conceptually even better at:
        - **quick and continuous learner**
        - understand and **concisely explain complex designs and problems**
        - determine **what's stuff and what's fluff**.
        - **Deep dive between layers of abstraction** to see interactions of different design choices
        - Time management => Ensure making steady progress on larger work items while trying to resolve small impediments
        - Professional work relationships => Work well with people in different roles and personalities, contributing to various fora
        - Professional communication => update progress to stakeholders and what's needed from them.
      - Allows me to be technical even better at:
        - **understand how computers work**, kernels, OS, tools to introspect what they are doing ("vmstat/iostat/netstat/atop").
        - **Understand /proc data** such as /smaps/fd/etc.., data and memory allocation in heap/stack/data segment, objdump/ldd/etc, profiling.
        - **Understand networking** => the responsibilities of various devices, the kernel, and userland processes, failure cases (bad link quality/packet loss, misbehaving/broken devices doing full packet drops or forgetting connections or rehashing to a different flow) and the responses to those failures. Understand flow/congestion control.
        - Write good idiomatic, code in various languages, in the prevailing style of existing codebase even if you don't like the style and most importantly conceptualized the working of the large code bases.
    - "Why Facebook?”
      - A first and truly planet scale company that connects people all around the world.

# Abstract

1. This document defines knowledge required for soft skills interview as well as topics to prepare for

# Knowledge

- Know how to **speak of projects** that **you have completed highly** in a few sentences
- Know **who you worked with** and **the challenges you faced** - no technical, be general
- Know **your mistakes in the past** and know how you should have done to avoid that mistake and improve the status quo
- Know **why you changed your role** in the past
- Know **your motivations** for your past role changes.
- Know **why PE excites you** and **why it's a good fit for you**

# Topics

- Tell me about a recent project you are proud of.
- Tell me about a design decision you made that you later regretted.
- Tell me about a disagreement or conflict between you and a coworker.
- What motivates you to leave your current role?
- Describe your ideal day at work.
- What is your understanding of Production Engineering?
  - A hybrid between software and systems engineering
  - Production Engineering - Responsibilities
    - Own back-end services like our Hadoop data warehouses, front-end services like Messenger and Newsfeed, infrastructure components like our Memcache infrastructure, and everything in between
    - Write and review code, develop documentation and capacity plans, and debug the hardest problems, live, on some of the largest and most complex systems in the world
    - Together with your engineering team, you will share an on-call rotation and be an escalation contact for service incidents
    - Partnered alongside the best engineers in the industry on the coolest stuff around, the code and systems you work on will be in production and used by millions of users all around the world
  - Systems Engineering - Responsibilities
    - Focuses on our hardware fleet by providing hardware agnostic APIs, device management, health tracking and a robust firmware management system.
    - Augment and enable software infrastructure to manage, maintain and track hardware in our growing fleet.
    - Develop systems that proactively capture health status of various hardware components.
    - Provide software capabilities to upgrade all elements of the hardware fleet.
    - Understand provisioning software and work with production engineering teams to enable new hardware SKUs, and improve the automation of provisioning and remediation capabilities.
    - Partner with technical product management, production engineering, kernel development, hardware engineering, sustaining engineering, and other related groups.
- "Why Facebook?”
  - Facebook ranks No. 1 on Glassdoor's 2018 best places to work list.
  - Facebook tops the list for a number of reasons, including its perks and compensation, leadership, and career opportunities.
  - Reasons for becoming a FB employee
    - Employees say they feel valued and trusted
    - Facebookers are driven by the company's mission
    - The senior leadership at Facebook is transparent
    - Being surrounded by smart colleagues keeps Facebookers motivated
    - There are plenty of opportunities for advancement
    - Facebook offers competitive compensation
    - Not to mention standout perks and benefits
  - Reasons this company shines
    - Facebook is the Biggest - over 2.23 billion monthly active users
    - 40 billion in revenue and 20 billion operating income
