# Glossary
* WPA - Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA) or Wi-Fi Protected Access II (WPA2) or Wi-Fi Protected Access III (WPA3) are three security protocols and security certification programs developed by the Wi-Fi Alliance to secure wireless computer networks.
* WPA-Enterprise - Designed for enterprise networks and requires a RADIUS authentication server. It requires a more complicated setup, but provides additional security against dictionary attacks on short passwords. WPA-Enterprise mode is available with both WPA and WPA2
* WPA-EAP - Extensible Authentication protocol for WPA is frequently used in wireless networks and point-to-point connections.
* EPA - It's a framework for providing the transport and usage of material and parameters generated by EAP methods. It's a wire protocol which defines the information from the interface and the formats. Each protocol that uses EAP defines a way to encapsulate by the user EAP messages within that protocol's messages.
* Wi-Fi Protected Setup (WPS) - An alternative authentication key distribution method intended to simplify and strengthen the process, but which, as widely implemented, creates **a major security hole via WPS PIN recovery**.
* WPA-PSK (WPA-PERSONAL) - Designed for home and small office networks and **doesn't require an authentication server**. Each wireless netwrok device encrypts the network traffic by deriving its 128-bit encryption key from a 256 bit shared key. This mode is available in both WPA and WPA2
* TPIK - Temporal Key Integrity Protocol
